# The Stories We Don't Tell - Transcript

Hello everyone!  It's good to be presenting here today at SeaGL, ah, talking about the stories that we don't tell.  If you want to follow along with the sources that I used to put together this presentation as I'm speaking, you can go to the Github link on the slide at the moment, or scan the QR code with your phone, and it will bring you to a Github repository with all of the sources that I used while putting this talk together.

I wouldn't be able to tell this story without the stories of the people that came before me; the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation, on whose land this talk was recorded, and all the other Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander groups across Australia.  This country is, and always will be, Aboriginal land.  Their sovereignty was never ceded.  Additionally, I wouldn't be able to tell this story without the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mentors that I had growing up.  Their stories are theirs to tell, but without the framework that they gave me for telling stories that were important to them, I wouldn't be able to talk about things that are important to me.

So the first story here, I guess, is - who am I?  And - my name is Dawn, and I am a security and DevOps person at Innablr, which is a boutique consultancy in Melbourne, Australia.  We like to solve DevOps type problems, and we're hiring and looking for new clients, so if you happen to be down that way and you need someone to solve those problems, let me know, and I can put you in touch with the right people.  And in addition, I am a storyteller.  I like telling stories, and I find that - there's a lot of meaning in the stories that we tell, that it's often very useful to, sort of, look at as a framework for the world.  And that has led me, outside of work, to being an occasional author. I'm also a kitchen alchemist - sometimes that ends really well, sometimes it doesn't.  And I am a raging sportsball fan, which is why - sorry Seattle - that picture of me is me in a Boston Bruins sweater.

So - this story starts with Graham Farr.  And he is - pretty well exactly what you would expect from the head of a school of IT at a fairly large university in Australia, which is to say that he's not particularly marginalised in any way that would be - discernible just by looking at him.  But this is not his story, so here's what you need to know.  As well as being the head of the school of IT at one of Melbourne's two big universities, in his spare time in the before times, he used to run computer history tours of Melbourne.  Basically what this was was a bunch of people would get together, and go around Melbourne and look at a lot of the sites that had been influential in the development of - computing and the IT industry in the city.  So we went- we started the day at the, erm,museum of computing at the university at which Graham Farr is the head of the school of IT, and - that museum is full of all sorts of really nifty old computers, and you can really see the progression there from - the very early days of computing to the types of machines that we run on now.  We went to the site where the codebreakers used to work during the Second World War.  Pretty normal suburban house, ah but of course as befits a top secret site, it was very common to hear people talking on the tram about that house where all of the spies were working.  But the site that is important to this talk, the one that got me thinking originally about the types of stories that we tell, was the Melbourne Observatory.  And that was the home to the first computers in Melbourne.  Except these weren't computers made out of circuit boards and semiconductors; these computers were people.  Unmarried women, typically young, who worked day in day out taking observations of the sky, and doing calculations on- fairly basic calculation machines.  And through their work we have a massive trove of data ab- about astronomy in Australia that we've been able to build on even up to this day.  And I imagine that a lot of the people who went on the computer history tour of Melbourne with me thought about the fact that now, the IT industry is very male-dominated - and it's so interesting that back in the day it was mostly women.  But my takeaway from that was different.  I'd heard about Ada Lovelace and Grace Hopper; women who were extremely influential in the development of computing as we know it today.  What was interesting to me is that - we don't tell the story about - the original field of computing being so women- being so dominated by women, even though a lot of the influential people in technology at that time were women.

And so this brings me to the topic of the stories that we do tell.  Because - even back in those days, the types of stories that we tell cut across some very interesting lines.  They're very typically individual stories.  Erm, you'll see - very often we'll talk about, you know, women in IT who have who are in positions where they're trailblazers.  They're the first; you know, the first woman, the first person of colour, the first otherwise marginalised person in that particular position.  And one of the really interesting aspects of that is that those stories tend to focus a lot on the positive attributes that got them there.  Talking about, you know, their strength, their perseverance, their resilience, how they kept on trying, and they never gave up, even when they were faced with adversity, and how they've used those positive attributes to thrive in - an industry which is often very homogeneous.  But you don't see a lot of stories about diverse teams building solutions to the problems that face them every day.  I mean sure, there are a lot of stories about - how IT is a very homogeneous industry, and how we often don't do this well, but the vast majority of the stories of people who are atypical, or people who are underrepresented or marginalised in our industry, are not solution oriented.  They're goal-oriented.  They're talking about individual people and what they've done to get to the position that they have.

But we can't talk about those individual people without talking about another genre of stories that we very often tell in the IT industry.  And those are the stories of why people walk away.  I could name many many stories, and many many companies, just in the past 12 months.  I'm not going to single anywhere in particular out, but if you do want to have a look at some of those stories that inspired this talk, you can find them in the sources.  And the stories of why underrepresented and marginalised people walk away from the IT industry often have a number of common attributes.  There's a lot of discussion about lack of sponsorship from managers, from the people who are leading your teams.  If- your contributions are not valued, then you're going to find it very difficult to actually get on and do your job.  But sometimes those sorts of things kind of build up into - a situation, not just a situation where you have lack of sponsorship, but a situation where actually speaking your mind becomes risky.  And very often, you know, people who are underrepresented or marginalised will find themselves in positions where - they're able to see the way that software affects people like them in ways that - people who've never experienced that can't really grok.  And ultimately that means that often you end up with some really destructive environments there.  If you can't speak your mind about how you think a piece of software is going to affect people like you, it's going to be- detrimental to your ability to actually do your job.  Another, sort of, theme that comes up in these stories very often is a theme of unequal expectations.  But it's not always the same type of unequal expectations.  That cuts in a lot of different ways.  Sometimes it can be that people who are marginalised or people from underrepresented groups are expected to do twice as much work just to get the same recognition.  But sometimes it also takes the form of - people who don't look like everyone else in the room being expected to do a lot of the busy work.  Sometimes not even the busy work, I mean employee resource groups are a very common thing, they've cropped up a lot, you know, they're cropping up a lot nowadays, but - people never think about the fact that the work of running employee resource groups often falls to those who are marginalised or underrepresented in some way, and that that then becomes a time suck which affects their ability to actually do the work that they're paid for.  It's very rare, from what I've seen - to actually see a discussion about how things like employee resource groups and initiatives that members of marginalised or underrepresented groups are expected to lead themselves add more to their plate, and how others - allies - can actually step up and help push some of that work along.  And really, what this ultimately breaks down to is that being the only `x` in the room is sometimes really exhausting, for any given value of `x`.

And really, no wonder we talk about resilience so much!  If we're looking at all of these sorts of, ah, aspects of contributors to why people walk away, it's no wonder that when we tell those stories about the trailblazers, we're focusing on positive aspects that they've kept on, you know, they've kept on going.  What we don't see is that often, people who walk away have a lot of resilience as well, it's just they've hit one time too many, and have decided that they can't do it anymore.

And this is where open-source comes in.  See, open-source, and the open-source community, is often one of the first places that people, you know, it's often, ah, sort of- it's often somewhere where people who are really interested in the tech industry will use open-source as a springboard into their career.  But what we don't talk about so much is how people actually come into contact with the open-source community in the first place.  And from my experience, as someone where this probably was a big part of my gateway into tech, and from what I've seen from others as well, very often, the portal to open-source is that you have some sort of problem that you want to solve, or that you're interested in- you're interested in building something, and doing something.

And that can be as simple as, you know, I plug ah NVDA a lot, the free and open-source screen reader for Windows, when I give talks, but if you're someone who's setting up NVDA, you might find that you- that might be your first contact with a - sort of, an open-source group is 'hey, I want to do this, and I need help to set it up'. You find often, with tools like LibreOffice and- other sort of open-source tools as well, that people who are using them might be from groups where they've not had a lot of opportunity to use computers before, or they might be from groups where they don't have a lot of money to actually go ahead and set up commercial tools, so very often that will be their first introduction to open-source.  And then you've got the group of people who- want to solve a problem and either don't have the skills to solve it and there is no similar solution, or - all of the solutions that there are are not good for them for particular reasons.  We'll touch on that in a minute.  And often those kinds of people will end up in open-source communities saying 'hey, this is something that I want to solve for'.

And so we- we talk a lot then, about the figure of speech of the shoulders of giants.  And - open-source communities, when they embrace this role, can be giants, for a few different reasons.  The first one is that if you're someone who's really interested in building something or solving a problem, and you don't have a lot of tech knowledge, that's going to be really hard.  If you have to go and, sort of, learn JavaScript yourself - you know, even learning - coding from Khan Academy, which is fairly intuitive and steps you through things, is not necessarily going to give you the ability to solve a really big problem all on your own.  And so people are much less likely to give up if they've got people around them helping to solve that problem, and if they've got people around them to support them when they fail, and to say, 'hey, you can keep doing this, try this - you know, give this another go'.  Another interesting thing here is - even if you do manage to teach yourself how to code, quality coding practices and generally good design patterns for architecture aren't necessarily instinctive.  They might be to a lot of us, because we've been in the tech industry for a long time, but to someone who's just coming in and trying to build software themselves, it's not necessarily going to be instinctive for them.  And so having people around you that you can bounce ideas off, and learn from, is really important in that regard.  And ultimately, a lot of what this leads to is that - a lot of us in the open-source community have failed, and we've failed a lot.  But if you have people around you who encourage you to embrace failure, then that's often what's going to lead you to be able to solve the problems that got you in contact with the open-source community in the first place.

So from the term of Free, Libre, and Open-Source software, I want to extend this out a bit, to the concept of Free, Libre, and Open thinking; which is the way that I think is very useful for us to interact with people who are just coming into the open-source community, if we want to get them to embrace our ethos. And that really starts with the attitude of, not everyone who comes into the open-source community is going to have the level of skills that people who've been around for many years do, and that's okay.  Part of being able to get them involved, and get them interested in our mission, and to be able to actually help them use open-source to build things that they're interested in, is having the attitude of meeting people where they are, and saying yes, you know, we know that you don't have all the skills, but you're interested in this, you have the ability to solve problems, you're interested in solving problems, let's help you solve those problems.  And that can be really useful then to - if we talk about the idea of giving people fish compared to teaching them to fish, it can be really useful then as an open-source community to say, you know, we're not going to build the solution for you, we're going to help you and upskill you so that you can build that solution with support.  And another important aspect of this is that when we're looking at people particularly from marginalised and underrepresented groups coming into open-source communities, everyone should have full control over their personal data, and that particularly goes for demographic data.  In a lot of cases, the only solution to particular problems is commercial, and if you're not paying for that then you are the product, and your data is probably being sold.  And that means in underrepresented and marginalised communities, that tends to foster a lot of distrust.  So if we can come to people with these problems with the proposition of - we're going to help you to solve that problem in a way that you have control over the data, and you don't have to hand it over to people who are going to sell it or potentially use it to track you, that's an extremely compelling value proposition then, for people coming in.

And I want to take a brief tangent here to talk about representation.  And this will be probably the only real personal anecdote in this whole talk.  There are not a lot of people in the IT industry who look like me.  I mean, yes, I'm white, but I'm queer, I'm disabled, I have had a lot of life experiences that are fairly atypical, and I don't have a university degree.  And - when I've seen, you know, stories that are being told about people who are like me, often they turn me off, because they do focus on those sorts of attributes of strength, perseverance, resilience, and grit.  What I think is more valuable around representation is to be able to see people in those positions of - being able to get things done, in those leadership positions in general, and to see them supported and to see a lot of them.  And that, I think, is a very important thing when we talk about representation, that it's no use having one or two case studies that we hold up.  The best sort of representation is when I can go into a room, and know that there are people that are like me there, that I'm not the only one, and that I don't have to rely on these stories of the trailblazers that are being told in the media.

So - where do we go from here?  Well, first of all, in terms of the open-source community, I think that we can come up with a set of principles around building diverse communities.  And one of the first things here is that there are a lot of people who are- marginalised in some way or who are from underrepresented groups that have problems that they want to solve, and they don't know that we can solve them.  And part of building a diverse community is actually about going out to these people, and saying 'hey, open-source might be able to solve your problem, come and engage with us, and we'll do whatever we can to help you solve it'.  Then once they're aware of the open-source community, if the open-source community is a house, your code of conduct, as an open-source community, is kind of the sign on your gate.  That's what you're telling people when they're actually coming up to interact with you - about who you are and what you do.  So it's really really critical to get that right, because that will often be the difference between people engaging more and people walking away.  There are a lot of open-source codes of conduct that have been very heavily used in the community, that you can take and use or modify, but it's also important to be transparent about how you're actually enforcing it.  Another important thing to look at is the idea of ah, monetary support for open-source contributors.  And that can take several forms.  That can be as simple as sponsoring people on Github.  It can be as simple as getting involved with programs like Outreachy, which pay for marginalised and underrepresented people to work on established open-source projects, or finding some sort of monetary way to support people who are coming up with new open-source projects.

And then - there's a set of, sort of, things that are fairly specific to the workplace, although all of the ideas about open-source communities can translate to the workplace as well, and the first thing is that - if you're looking to get people in who don't look like your traditional IT person, retraining and career re-entry schemes are typically really useful for that.  But something that a lot of people get wrong is they talk about, you know, we've hired 50 percent women in the last year!  Or - we've hired 20 percent people with disabilities in the past year!  What matters there though, is not who you're hiring, it's - whether you're actually retaining them.  It's much more important to give people a structure where they feel supported, and to actually look at retention numbers, rather than just getting them in the door.  And that's really about listening to people about what they need.  Another thing that's important, as well, is having a clear path for people to leadership roles.  And some of that is about being transparent with your expectations, and some of that is also about giving people appropriate support to step into those roles if they're interested.  Things like flexible work, other things like that.

Ideally what I want is for us to come to a point where difference is ordinary and celebrated; where I can walk into a room, and others can walk into a room, and see people who look like us.  And that is really what I would like us to come to around - the particular types of stories that we tell.

If you have any questions, ah, I will be around for the next 10 minutes or you can contact me on the details above.  Thank you for coming along with me as I told you this story, and I hope that this inspires you at some point to start telling the types of stories that we don't usually tell.
